Add an AI overview page (#843)
jupyter/jupyter.github.io: ai.md

---
layout: page
title: AI in Jupyter
tagline: Learn about AI-related work from within the Jupyter project
permalink: /ai
---

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Large Language Models (LLMs) play an increasingly important role in the industry, and within the Jupyter community.
This ecosystem is also relatively young and evolving rapidly.
The goal of this page is to point you in the right direction to learn more about various initiatives within the Jupyter ecosystem related to AI.

## Technical efforts related to AI in Jupyter subprojects

### Jupyter AI

> [Jupyter AI](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyter-ai) is an ecosystem of tools for working with AI and LLMs in Jupyter interfaces. It is currently incubating as a part of the [Jupyter-Frontends subproject](https://github.com/jupyterlab/frontends-team-compass).

Reviewer: I would avoid calling it an ecosystem. It is a tempting, but deceiving simplification. I would say that `jupyter-ai-contrib`, `jupyter-ai` and `jupyterlite/ai` form an ecosystem; `jupyter-ai` is an opinionated distribution of tools from `jupyter-ai-contrib`.

```suggestion
[Jupyter AI](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyter-ai) is an extension providing a set of tools for working with AI and LLMs in Jupyter interfaces. It is currently incubating as a part of the [Jupyter-Frontends subproject](https://github.com/jupyterlab/frontends-team-compass).
```

Reviewer: > would say that jupyter-ai-contrib, jupyter-ai and jupyterlite/ai form an ecosystem;

Which is especially true because both jupyter-ai and jupyterlite/ai depend on some of the same building blocks (which are in jupyter-ai-contrib).

Reviewer: An attempt at depiction of the dependencies (simplified):

```mermaid
graph TD

%% Top-level
JL["jupyterlite/ai"]
JAI["jupyter-ai"]

%% Subgraphs
subgraph LAB["jupyterlab"]
  direction TB
  CHAT["@jupyterlab/chat"]
end

subgraph AI_CONTRIB["jupyter-ai-contrib"]
  direction TB
  JCC["jupyter-chat-components"]
  JLAC["jupyterlab-ai-commands"]
  JACC["jupyter-ai-chat-commands"]
  OTHER["+10 other packages"]
end

subgraph LAB_CONTRIB["jupyterlab-contrib"]
  direction TB
  JSM["jupyter-secrets-manager"]
end

%% Connections
JL --> CHAT
JAI --> CHAT

JL --> JCC
JL --> JLAC
JL --> JSM

JAI --> JCC
JAI --> JACC
JAI --> OTHER

%% Styling (GitHub-compatible)
style LAB fill:#e3f2fd,stroke:#1e88e5,stroke-width:1px
style AI_CONTRIB fill:#e8f5e9,stroke:#43a047,stroke-width:1px
style LAB_CONTRIB fill:#fff3e0,stroke:#fb8c00,stroke-width:1px
```

<details>

<summary>Static image version in case if the above renders badly in dark themes</summary>

<img width="1692" height="219" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3ad755f0-9299-4c0b-9ede-bc67ed74f479" />

</details>

> [Jupyter AI](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyter-ai) is an extension providing a set of tools for working with AI and LLMs in Jupyter interfaces. It is currently incubating as a part of the [Jupyter-Frontends subproject](https://github.com/jupyterlab/frontends-team-compass).

Author: ```suggestion
[Jupyter AI](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyter-ai) is an extension that connects AI agents to computational notebooks in JupyterLab. It is currently incubating as a part of the [Jupyter-Frontends subproject](https://github.com/jupyterlab/frontends-team-compass).
```

Author: Just using the exact copy from the docs

### Jupyter AI Contrib

> [jupyter-ai-contrib](https://github.com/jupyter-ai-contrib) is a community organization hosting extensions, integrations, and experiments that build on Jupyter AI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[jupyter-ai-contrib](https://github.com/jupyter-ai-contrib) is a community organization hosting extensions, integrations, and experiments that compose or build on Jupyter AI.
```

Reviewer: By adding "compose" I mean to highlight how jupyter-ai is just a meta-package that depends on things from jupyter-ai-contrib. Really, saying that contrib builds on jupyter-ai is wrong, there is no dependency this way in code, all dependencies are the other way.

Reviewer: By which I mean:

1. There is no code in Jupyter AI

<img width="978" height="348" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1f7dd35f-bb91-4117-90a0-26ce9448bee3" />

2. All but one dependencies live in contrib:

<img width="978" height="1110" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0bdcbdb7-c216-43f6-ab0c-04ff8a17d0cb" />

It is a combination of earlier-stage projects that undergo more rapid development and prototyping, and community-maintained projects.

### JupyterLite AI

> [jupyterlite/ai](https://github.com/jupyterlite/ai) provides AI-assisted features for [JupyterLite](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/), the in-browser Jupyter distribution. It is maintained within the [JupyterLite organization](https://github.com/jupyterlite).

Reviewer: See https://github.com/jupyterlite/ai/issues/297

```suggestion
[jupyterlite/ai](https://github.com/jupyterlite/ai) provides AI-assisted features for JupyterLab and Notebook v7+. The major differentiator from `jupyter-ai` package is lack of dependency on a server component which enables usage with both server-backed and serverless deployments (such as [JupyterLite](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/)). This project offers easier installation and fewer complex dependencies, but by design cannot implement certain workflows, such as hand-off to a background agent who would continue work on the notebook after the browser gets closed. It is currently maintained within the [JupyterLite organization](https://github.com/jupyterlite).
```

Author: Could we just keep this simple and reuse the language from the jupyterlite-ai docs?

> AI code completions and chat for JupyterLab, Notebook 7 and JupyterLite.

Id like to avoid this page comparing functionality, features, etc between these efforts, at least for now. Id recommend we create a deeper explanation of how these projects complement one another in the docs and we can link to that from here when it is ready

Reviewer: Sure, I do not want to block it either. My point is there is only one clear distinction between the jupyterlite/ai and jupyter-ai: the former is serverless. The name which mentions jupyterlite is a misnomer and subject to change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[jupyterlite/ai](https://github.com/jupyterlite/ai) provides AI code completions and chat for JupyterLab, Notebook 7 and JupyterLite. It is maintained within the [JupyterLite organization](https://github.com/jupyterlite).
```

> AI code completions and chat for JupyterLab, Notebook 7 and JupyterLite.

though it also offers agent mode so that is out of date too..

## Where to discuss AI in the Jupyter community?

For asynchronous chat, the [JupyterLab channel in Zulip](https://jupyter.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/469762-jupyterlab) is your best bet.

> Because the Jupyter AI project is incubating within the Jupyter Frontends subproject, this channel is the best place to have developer-related conversations about AI.

Reviewer: Should we also mention the synchronous meeting which happens on Wednesdays?

https://jupyter.org/community#calendar

Author: Sure - please suggest the right language to use! I am not sure I know the format of the meeting well enough

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Synchronous conversations and demos happen during the weekly Jupyter AI meeting (see [calendar](https://jupyter.org/community#calendar)) and [community workshops](https://jupyter.org/community#jupyter-community-workshops).
Because the Jupyter AI project is incubating within the Jupyter Frontends subproject, this channel is the best place to have developer-related conversations about AI.
```

## Frequently Asked Questions

> 

Reviewer: I think this is valuable to add, but I am not set on the level of detail; I know that it might become out of date soon but this is true of the entire page in general. CC @dlqqq @jtpio to check for correctness

```suggestion

### What is the difference between `jupyter-ai` and `jupyterlite/ai`

Both projects integrate AI features into JupyterLab and Notebook v7+ interfaces. `jupyterlite/ai` does not depend on a server component which makes it possible to use it with JupyterLite, the in-browser Jupyter distribution. `jupyter-ai` enables agentic workflows that can continue to run on the server even when the browser is closed or disconnected. Server dependency distinction aside, the set of features overlaps, with both packages implementing agentic workflows and tool calling. Notably, `jupyterlite/ai` also implements AI code completion, and `jupyter-ai` implements multi-agent workflow.

```

Reviewer 2: That's a good summary. We should also definitely find a better name than `@jupyterlite/ai` (https://github.com/jupyterlite/ai/issues/297) to avoid the confusion.
